python_code_style.md, before:

# Python Code Style

- [Setting up a new project](#setting-up-a-new-project)
- [False positives](#false-positives)
- [GitHub checks of PRs](#github-checks-of-prs)
- [Visual Studio Code](#visual-studio-code)
- [PyCharm](#pycharm)

To help us in implementing a consistent coding style throughout
our code base, we use git [pre-commit](https://github.com/pre-commit/pre-commit)
hooks with a set of linters to check and reformat the code:

- [pylint](https://www.pylint.org/) and [flake8](https://flake8.pycqa.org/)
  check the code style in accordance with
  [PEP8](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/), and perform some static
  analysis to catch potential programming errors.
- [pylint-quotes](https://pypi.org/project/pylint-quotes/) is a plugin to
  pylint that adds checks of the consistency of quotes (we stick to single
  quotes, with the only reason to prefer them over double quotes being the
  visual noise).
- [black](https://github.com/psf/black) actually reformats the code to make
  it conform to [PEP8](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/).
- Additional hooks provided by
  [pre-commit](https://github.com/pre-commit/pre-commit-hooks#hooks-available):
  - check-yaml
  - end-of-file-fixer
  - trailing-whitespace
  - check-case-conflict
  - check-merge-conflict
  - detect-private-key
  - debug-statements
  - check-added-large-files

## Setting up a new project

When creating a new repository that contains Python code, please add
these configuration files into the repository root folder:

```sh
URL=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/populationgenomics/team-docs/main/linting
wget $URL/pre-commit-config.yaml -O .pre-commit-config.yaml
wget $URL/pyproject.toml -O pyproject.toml
wget $URL/pylintrc -O .pylintrc
wget $URL/flake8 -O .flake8
wget $URL/markdownlintrc -O .markdownlintrc
```

Install `pre-commit` and `pylint` into your project environment with pip or 
conda:

```sh
conda install -c conda-forge pre-commit pylint
```

Note that `pylint` uses inspections that verify module imports, that assume 
that `pylint` is installed into the same environment as the python modules. 
If you don't want the module imports to be checked, you can disable such 
inspections (see [false-positives](#false-positives)).

Finally, to enable the hooks, run:

```sh
pre-commit install --install-hooks
```

Now on every `git commit`, the code will be automatically checked and
possibly reformatted. If any of the checks didn't pass or reformatting was
done, the actual `git commit` command will not be performed. You can act
upon linters' suggestions and re-run the `git commit` command afterwards.

You can also tirgger pre-commit manually on all files in the repo with:

```sh
pre-commit run --all-files
```


## False positives

Note that you may find some linters produce false positives, or just find 
some checks irrelevant for your particular project. In this case, you may 
want to modify the configuration files to disable additional inspections. 
For example, if you don't want pylint to check third-party module imports in 
your code, you can append `E0401,E1101,I1101` into the comma-separated list 
`disable` in `.pylintrc`:

```sh
disable=f-string-without-interpolation,inherit-non-class,too-few-public-methods,C0330,C0326,fixme,E0401,E1101,I1101
```

Similar list for flake8 is called `extend-ignore` as can be extended in the 
`.flake8` file.

To hide a piece of code for being reformatted with black, you
[can surround](https://github.com/psf/black#the-black-code-style)
your code with `# fmt: off` and `# fmt: on`.


## GitHub checks of PRs

In addition to `.pylintrc`, create a GitHub Actions CI workflow under
`.github/workflows/main.yaml` (or add the `lint` job
to an exsting workflow):

```sh
mkdir -p .github/workflows
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/populationgenomics/team-docs/main/linting/github-workflows-main.yaml -O .github/workflows/main.yaml
```

The CI workflow assumes you have a conda environment file named 
`environment-dev.yml` in the root folder of your repository that which 
specifies all project python dependencies along with `pre-commit` and `pylint` 
packages. To initiate this file, run:

```sh
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/populationgenomics/team-docs/main/linting/environment-dev.yml
```

This will make GitHub run the linters on every push and pull request, and
display checks in the web interface.

<img src="figures/github_lint_check.png" width="400"/>


## Visual Studio Code

Visual Studio Code auto-detects a .pylintrc file in the project root and asks
the user whether to install pylint, if it's not installed already.

## PyCharm

1. Make sure you have pylint installed with `pip install pylint pylint-quotes`.

2. Install the PyCharm "Pylint" plugin ([Preferences] > [Plugins] > search for
   "Pylint"). It will automatically find the pylint executable. A new tool
   window called Pylint will be added. You can use it to scan the project:

   <img src="figures/pycharm_pylint_tool_window.png" width="700"/>

3. You can also enable real-time inspections by going to: Go to Preferences >
   Editor > Inspections > enable "Pylint real-time scan". However, it's not
   recommended as it's has a negative impact on system performance.

4. Pylint has a pre-commit hook integrated into a PyCharm commit modal window
   (Cmd+K). Make sure the "Scan with Pylint" checkbox is enabled:

   <img src="figures/pycharm_pylint_pre_commit.png" width="700"/>

Note that PyCharm comes with very useful and advanced built-in inspections out
of the box; however, they don't fully overlap with pylint, so it's useful to
have both.

Commit message:

Add markdownlint. Add flake8 config. Run pulumi stack through linting

python_code_style.md, after:

# Python Code Style

- [Setting up a new project](#setting-up-a-new-project)
- [False positives](#false-positives)
- [GitHub checks of PRs](#github-checks-of-prs)
- [Visual Studio Code](#visual-studio-code)
- [PyCharm](#pycharm)

To help us in implementing a consistent coding style throughout
our code base, we use git [pre-commit](https://github.com/pre-commit/pre-commit)
hooks with a set of linters to check and reformat the code:

- [pylint](https://www.pylint.org/) and [flake8](https://flake8.pycqa.org/)
  check the code style in accordance with
  [PEP8](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/), and perform some static
  analysis to catch potential programming errors.
- [pylint-quotes](https://pypi.org/project/pylint-quotes/) is a plugin to
  pylint that adds checks of the consistency of quotes (we stick to single
  quotes, with the only reason to prefer them over double quotes being the
  visual noise).
- [black](https://github.com/psf/black) actually reformats the code to make
  it conform to [PEP8](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/).
- Additional hooks provided by
  [pre-commit](https://github.com/pre-commit/pre-commit-hooks#hooks-available):
  - check-yaml
  - end-of-file-fixer
  - trailing-whitespace
  - check-case-conflict
  - check-merge-conflict
  - detect-private-key
  - debug-statements
  - check-added-large-files

## Setting up a new project

When creating a new repository that contains Python code, please add
these configuration files into the repository root folder:

```sh
URL=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/populationgenomics/team-docs/main/linting
wget $URL/pre-commit-config.yaml -O .pre-commit-config.yaml
wget $URL/pyproject.toml -O pyproject.toml
wget $URL/pylintrc -O .pylintrc
wget $URL/flake8 -O .flake8
wget $URL/markdownlintrc -O .markdownlintrc
```

Install `pre-commit` and `pylint` into your project environment with pip or
conda:

```sh
conda install -c conda-forge pre-commit pylint
```

Note that `pylint` uses inspections that verify module imports, that assume
that `pylint` is installed into the same environment as the python modules.
If you don't want the module imports to be checked, you can disable such
inspections (see [false-positives](#false-positives)).

Finally, to enable the hooks, run:

```sh
pre-commit install --install-hooks
```

Now on every `git commit`, the code will be automatically checked and
possibly reformatted. If any of the checks didn't pass or reformatting was
done, the actual `git commit` command will not be performed. You can act
upon linters' suggestions and re-run the `git commit` command afterwards.

You can also tirgger pre-commit manually on all files in the repo with:

```sh
pre-commit run --all-files
```


## False positives

Note that you may find some linters produce false positives, or just find
some checks irrelevant for your particular project. In this case, you may
want to modify the configuration files to disable additional inspections.
For example, if you don't want pylint to check third-party module imports in
your code, you can append `E0401,E1101,I1101` into the comma-separated list
`disable` in `.pylintrc`:

```sh
disable=f-string-without-interpolation,inherit-non-class,too-few-public-methods,C0330,C0326,fixme,E0401,E1101,I1101
```

Similar list for flake8 is called `extend-ignore` as can be extended in the
`.flake8` file.

To hide a piece of code for being reformatted with black, you
[can surround](https://github.com/psf/black#the-black-code-style)
your code with `# fmt: off` and `# fmt: on`.


## GitHub checks of PRs

In addition to `.pylintrc`, create a GitHub Actions CI workflow under
`.github/workflows/lint.yaml` (or add the `lint` job
to an exsting workflow):

```sh
mkdir -p .github/workflows
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.
com/populationgenomics/team-docs/main/linting/github-workflows-lint.yaml\
 -O .github/workflows/lint.yaml
```

The CI workflow assumes you have a conda environment file named
`environment-dev.yml` in the root folder of your repository that which
specifies all project python dependencies along with `pre-commit` and `pylint`
packages. To initiate this file, run:

```sh
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/populationgenomics/team-docs/main/\
linting/environment-dev.yml
```

This will make GitHub run the linters on every push and pull request, and
display checks in the web interface.

<img src="figures/github_lint_check.png" width="400"/>


## Visual Studio Code

Visual Studio Code auto-detects a .pylintrc file in the project root and asks
the user whether to install pylint, if it's not installed already.

## PyCharm

1. Make sure you have pylint installed with `pip install pylint pylint-quotes`.

2. Install the PyCharm "Pylint" plugin ([Preferences] > [Plugins] > search for
   "Pylint"). It will automatically find the pylint executable. A new tool
   window called Pylint will be added. You can use it to scan the project:

   <img src="figures/pycharm_pylint_tool_window.png" width="700"/>

3. You can also enable real-time inspections by going to: Go to Preferences >
   Editor > Inspections > enable "Pylint real-time scan". However, it's not
   recommended as it's has a negative impact on system performance.

4. Pylint has a pre-commit hook integrated into a PyCharm commit modal window
   (Cmd+K). Make sure the "Scan with Pylint" checkbox is enabled:

   <img src="figures/pycharm_pylint_pre_commit.png" width="700"/>

Note that PyCharm comes with very useful and advanced built-in inspections out
of the box; however, they don't fully overlap with pylint, so it's useful to
have both.
